docs: add debugging client request overview (#6507)
apollographql/router: docs/source/routing/observability/debugging-client-requests.mdx

---
title: Debugging Client Requests to GraphOS Router

> subtitle: Options for analyzing incoming requests to help debug problematic requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subtitle: Options for analyzing and debugging incoming requests
```

description: Learn how to use GraphOS router telemetry and GraphOS Insights to inspect and debug incoming HTTP client requests.
---

> By default, the GraphOS Router doesn't generate logs for incoming HTTP requests nor export other telemetry metrics. The high request volume your router likely processes can generate significant telemetry data, increasing observability costs. For this reason, you can [configure](/graphos/routing/observability/telemetry) exactly the telemetry you want your router to collect and export.

Reviewer: Copyedited and moved this paragraph into the router-specific section

```suggestion
Learn to use GraphOS Insights and/or configure GraphOS Router to analyze and debug client requests. 
```

Author: Since this page is in the Routing section, I think it make sense to open with this.

Reviewer: This paragraph doesn't mention Studio and its Insights, so the `Using GraphOS Insights` section below feels unexpected. The above edit is meant to include it. 

If keeping this paragraph, I'd still propose some copyedits:

```suggestion
You can configure the GraphOS Router to generate logs and export telemetry metrics about incoming HTTP client requests. Because the likely high volume of client requests can generate significant telemetry data and incur steep observability costs, the router supports [configuration](/graphos/routing/observability/telemetry) of the exact telemetry you want your router to collect and export. 
```

And another option is to make all of `Using GraphOS Insights` into a Tip, as it's all an aside about non-router config.

Author: > This paragraph doesn't mention Studio and its Insights, so the Using GraphOS Insights section below feels unexpected.

Good point. I don't think of GraphOS Insights as separate from GraphOS Router--rather the router reports directly to insights w/o any additional configuration.

I'll make that clarification and add a mention of Insights here so the next section doesn't feel so jarring.

Author: https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6507/commits/f50662c53d0427842c7f36ddbc1e9a07e8244640

## Using GraphOS Insights

Without enabling additional telemetry, the easiest way to analyze GraphQL operation data is through [GraphOS Insights](/graphos/platform/insights). GraphOS Studio lets you analyze data from failed requests, such as GraphQL error messages ([if enabled](/graphos/routing/graphos-reporting#errors)) and the ID of the client making the request. You can also [segment your insights data](/graphos/platform/insights/client-segmentation) based on the client ID.

<Tip>

[Learn how to ensure client IDs are included in all requests.](/graphos/routing/observability/client-id-enforcement)

</Tip>

## Enabling additional telemetry

> Use the methods below if you need information outside of what's presented in GraphOS Studio to debug client requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get data outside of GraphOS Studio, you can configure the GraphOS Router to generate logs and export telemetry metrics about incoming HTTP client requests. Because the likely high volume of client requests can generate significant telemetry data and incur steep observability costs, the router supports [configuration](/graphos/routing/observability/telemetry) of the exact telemetry you want your router to collect and export. 
```

### Request and response logging

You can conditionally include the request body in your logs using the [`experimental-when-header`](/graphos/reference/router/telemetry/log-exporters/overview#requestresponse-logging) configuration option.

```yaml title="router.yaml"
telemetry:
  exporters:
    logging:
      # If one of these headers matches we will log supergraph and subgraphs requests/responses
      experimental_when_header:
        - name: apollo-router-log-request
          value: my_client
          headers: true # default: false
          body: true # default: false
```

### Debugging router logs

By default, the router uses the `info` level for its logging. [Enabling other logging levels](/graphos/reference/router/telemetry/log-exporters/overview) can help debug specific scenarios. Using non-`info` level configurations is only recommended for local or non-production environments.

### Rhai scripts and coprocessors

> Hooking into the `RouterService` layer with either [Rhai scripts](/graphos/routing/customization/rhai) or [coprocessors](/graphos/routing/customization/coprocessor) gives you access to the full HTTP request and response before processing occurs. You can use either Rhai scripts or coprocessors to add custom logic for what to log and when.

Author: @smyrick , the `before processing occurs` in this line confuses me. What processing are we talking about?

Reviewer 2: The `RouterService` external hook is called before the Router does any GraphQL parsing, Query Planning, or other features like Auth checks, so this is the first place you can log out the exact request before anything could error out

Author: Gotcha, the "response" part of `gives you access to the full HTTP request and _response_ before processing occurs` was what was giving me pause. Will just remove that.

```suggestion
Hooking into the `RouterService` layer with either [Rhai scripts](/graphos/routing/customization/rhai) or [coprocessors](/graphos/routing/customization/coprocessor) gives you access to the full HTTP request before processing occurs. You can use either Rhai scripts or coprocessors to add custom logic for what to log and when.
```

</Note>

### Telemetry spans and traces

Once you enable [router telemetry](/graphos/routing/observability/telemetry), traces have spans labeled `router`. These spans contain the HTTP information for a given client request via [OpenTelemetry standard attributes](/graphos/reference/router/telemetry/instrumentation/standard-attributes#router) such as `error.type` and `http.response.status_code`.

These attributes include helpful information about the request and response. Spans, however, don't include an attribute for the HTTP body text. If you want to see the GraphQL operation, first check your [GraphOS Insights](/graphos/platform/insights) or use the other options listed below.

### Request and response logging

You can conditionally include the request body in your logs using the [`experimental-when-header`](/graphos/reference/router/telemetry/log-exporters/overview#requestresponse-logging) configuration option.

```yaml title="router.yaml"
telemetry:
  exporters:
    logging:
      # If one of these headers matches we will log supergraph and subgraphs requests/responses

>       experimental_when_header:

Reviewer 3: Let's change this to use the event mechanism. `experimental_when_header` is actually going away https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6285

Users should use:
```
telemetry:
  instrumentation:
    spans:
      default_attribute_requirement_level: recommended
      mode: spec_compliant
    events:
      supergraph:
        "resp":
          level: info
          attributes:
            graphql.document: true
            response:
              response_data: $.*
          on: event_response
          message: "logged request"
```

Author: Thanks @BrynCooke , GTK.

I'm a little confused about this config. If the intent is to log the GraphQL operation, would it make more sense to use `telemetry.instrumentation.events.supergraph.request`?

E.g.

```
telemetry:
  instrumentation:
    spans:
      default_attribute_requirement_level: recommended
      mode: spec_compliant
    events:
      supergraph:
        request:
          level: info
          attributes:
            graphql.document: true
          on: event_request
          message: "logged request"
```

Author: @BrynCooke , could you take a review this code sample to see if it makes sense?

Author: Thanks @devfreddy-apollo . From the [conversation in the open PR](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6563#discussion_r1943611841), do you think this is still worth documenting given it's not conditionally done? (Which I believe is why @smyrick  was documenting it in the first place.)
